Information on the plumage differences and distribution of the subspecies of the white wagtail is shown below. Nine subspecies are generally accepted.[17] Two others, M. a. dukhunensis and M. a. persica, are accepted by some other authors, but are generally considered synonyms of M. a. alba.[17] The black-backed wagtail M. a. lugens may be a separate species.[18]

Subspecies	Range	Notes	Image
M. a. yarrellii	Great Britain and Ireland; birds in the northern part of the range winter in Spain and North Africa, those further south are resident.[19]	Pied wagtail. Has a much blacker back than the nominate race, black of throat continues on side of neck. Named after William Yarrell (1784–1856), the writer of the History of British Birds (first ed. 1843).	
M. a. alba	Europe from the Iberian Peninsula to Ural Mountains, Turkey, the Levant, Iceland, the Faroe Islands and Greenland's eastern coast. Some migrate to the south of Europe and Africa down as far as Kenya and Malawi. In Britain, they breed on Shetland and occasionally elsewhere, and are regular on passage (mostly from Iceland, but also Scandinavia) in spring and autumn.	Nominate subspecies	
M. a. subpersonata	Morocco; non-migratory resident	Moroccan wagtail. It has more black on the head than the nominate, and resembles a grey-backed, white-throated African pied wagtail[19]	
M. a. personata	Hindu Kush, Tian Shan, Altay Mountains (northern Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Xinjiang)	Masked wagtail. All-black head with a white face mask	
M. a. baicalensis	Russia in Lake Baikal area, Mongolia, Inner Mongolia	Resembles M. a. leucopsis but grey back and less white on head and wing.	
M. a. ocularis	Siberia, Far Eastern (Russia, eastwards from Central Siberian Plateau) expanding into West Alaska	Similar to M. a. lugens, but with an all grey rump, clearer blue-grey and darker gray back.[20]
M. a. lugens	Russia Far East (Primorsky Krai, Khabarovsk Krai), Kamchatka Peninsula, Kuril Islands, Sakhalin, Japan (Hokkaidō, Honshū)	Black-backed wagtail or Kamchatka/Japanese pied wagtail, similar to M. a. yarrellii, but has a black eyestripe and white remiges; might have a claim to constitute a distinct species.	
M. a. leucopsis	China, Korean Peninsula, Japan (Ryukyu Islands, Kyūshū), expanding into Japan (Honshū), Southeast Asia, India, and Oceania	Amur wagtail[21][22][23]	
M. a. alboides	Himalayas and surrounding area	This subspecies has a black back and a lot of black around the head, a white wing panel and white edges on the secondaries and tertials.	
[M. a. persica]	North central and western Iran.	Intermediate between M. a. dukhunensis and M. a. personata. Now usually included in alba; appears to be hybrid or intergrade population.[19]	
[M. a. dukhunensis]	West Siberian Plain east Caspian Sea (part of Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan); winters in the Middle East, India and Bangladesh. Now usually included in M. a. alba.[17][19]	Indian pied wagtail. The upperparts of this subspecies are paler and more blue-grey than nominate, and has it has a continuous unbroken white panel on wing coverts.